-*- mode: outline -*-

* Version 0.47, released 2019-09-11

** bug fixes

Allow running in ECL even if there is no C compiler available.

** new features

Added the HMAC-KDF key derivation function.

* Version 0.46, released 2019-06-04

** bug fixes

Allow the 'digest' parameter of the 'make-kdf' function to be a keyword.

** new features

Added the Argon2d key derivation function (without parallelism).

* Version 0.45, released 2019-02-18

** bug fixes

Pseudo-random number generation is now thread safe, but only when the threads
are created with the bordeaux-threads library.

** new features

Added the SM3 digest (GM/T 0004-2012).

Added the SM4 cipher (GM/T 0002-2012).

Added the SipHash MAC.

* Version 0.44, released 2018-11-03

** new features

Added the EAX authenticated encryption scheme.

Added support of 256, 512 and 1024 bit block ciphers to CMAC.

Added the Kalyna128, Kalyna256 and Kalyna512 block ciphers (DSTU 7624:2014)

Added the Kupyna and Kupyna/256 digests (DSTU 7564:2014)

Some optimizations for Chacha and Salsa for ECL.

Some optimizations for Poly1305 for ECL.

* Version 0.43, released 2018-09-14

** new features

Added support for PKCS7, ANSI X.923 and ISO 7816-4 padding schemes when
encrypting or decrypting in ECB or CBC mode.

Added support for CFB, CFB8 and OFB modes to encrypting/decrypting streams.

Added the GMAC authentication code.

Added the GCM (Galois counter mode) and ETM (Encrypt then MAC) authenticated
encryption schemes.

Some optimizations for CMAC and Poly1305.

Some optimizations for CBC, CFB, CTR and OFB modes.

Some optimizations for Skein.

* Version 0.42, released 2018-08-09

** bug fixes

Fixed loading with SBCL versions newer than 1.4.10

Fixed wrong decryption when using the decrypt-in-place function with a block
cipher in CFB mode.

** new features

The encrypt-message and decrypt-message methods can be used with ciphers (in
addition to public or private keys).

Some optimizations for ed25519 and ed448.

* Version 0.41, released 2018-07-30

** new features

Added the original Keccak digests (SHA3 with a different padding).

Added the Streebog digests (GOST R 34.11-2012).

Added the Kuznyechik block cipher (GOST R 34.12-2015).

* Version 0.40, released 2018-06-20

** new features

Add ability to get or set the current position in the key stream for block
ciphers in CTR mode and stream cipher of the Chacha and Salsa20 families.

* Version 0.39, released 2018-04-19

** bug fixes

Fixed Poly1305 returning a bad MAC when calling produce-mac several times.

Fixed tree-hash returning a bad hash when calling produce-digest several times.

* Version 0.38, released 2018-02-20

** bug fixes

Fixed possible floating point exception when using strong-random with
a very large integer limit.

Fixed possible array type issue when compiling +ED448-DOM+.

Fixed bug where read-sequence was returning an invalid value for
encrypting-input-stream and decrypting-input-stream.

** new features

Optimized the Poly1305 MAC.

Add a COMPATIBLE-WITH-KEY keyword to GENERATE-KEY-PAIR for Elgamal
keys, to generate compatible Elgamal key pairs for a Diffie-Hellman
exchange more easily.

* Version 0.37, released 2017-11-23

Renamed NULL cipher to XOR. It's a better description of what it does,
and it allows not having to shadow cl:null.

** new features

Added the Camellia block cipher.

Added the SEED block cipher.

Added the ARIA block cipher.

Added the Sosemanuk stream cipher.

* Version 0.36, released 2017-10-02

** bug fixes

Fixed stream cryptors for Chacha and Salsa20. Some bytes of the
keystream were ignored after encrypting less than 64 bytes at once.

Fixed tree hash digester. It could sometimes give a wrong result when
fed data incrementally.

Fixed Arcfour cipher reinitialization.

** new features

Added Gray streams support for ABCL, ECL and Clisp.

Added encrypting streams and decrypting streams. Only stream ciphers
and block ciphers in CTR mode are supported for the moment.

Added authenticating streams.

* Version 0.35, released 2017-09-06

** bug fixes

Fixed type checking of stream element-type in the
update-digest-from-stream function.

Fixed possible timing attack in the pbkdf2-check-password function.

** new features

New algorithms:
 - Cipher: XChacha, XSalsa20
 - Diffie-Hellman: Curve25519, Curve448, Elgamal
 - Digest: JH, Groestl
 - Key derivation function: Argon2i
 - Message authentication code: Blake2, Blake2s
 - Signature: Ed448

New default pseudo-random number generator (os-prng) using the
operating system's PRNG.

Added optimized versions of some common functions for CCL on x86-64
CPUs and for ECL.

Added optimized AES functions (round keys generation, encryption and
decryption) for SBCL on x86-64 CPUs with AES-NI support.

Added optimized Blake2s mixing for SBCL on x86-64 CPUs.

Added the constant-time-equal function to check the equality of two
byte arrays (e.g. passwords, MACs) in constant time.

Added the make-message, destructure-message, make-signature and
destructure-signature functions allowing to manage the elements of
messages and signatures returned by encrypt-message and sign-message
by hand if necessary (e.g. to use a different serialization).

Added the destructure-public-key and destructure-private-key functions
(e.g. to store keys somewhere and reconstruct them later with
make-public-key and make-private-key).

Added a unified API for MACs.

* Version 0.34, released 2017-03-07

** bug fixes

Padding issues in 64-bit SHA variants have been fixed.

Compiling with newer versions of SBCL will no longer throw errors due to
a missing SB-BIGNUM:BIGNUM-TYPE.

** new features

Many new algorithms have been added, all by Guillaume LE VAILLANT:
Threefish, Skein, ElGamal, ED25519, Poly1305, Serpent, SHA3, Blake2, and
variants thereof.

CTR mode should be faster on some implementations.  (Thanks to Guillaume
LE VAILLANT.)

* Version 0.33, released 2014-10-15

** bug fixes

Included prng.testvec in the packaged tarball.

The group parameter accessors for DSA keys have been fixed to not throw
errors.  (Thanks to Patrick Stein.)

** new features

The convenience function WITH-DIGESTING-STREAM has been added to the
IRONCLAD package.  (Thanks to Samium Gromoff.)

A new convenience package, IRONCLAD-TEXT, is included with this release;
when loaded, IRONCLAD-TEXT exports the function
WITH-DIGESTING-TEXT-STREAM from the IRONCLAD package.  IRONCLAD-TEXT
depends on FLEXI-STREAMS.  (Thanks to Samium Gromoff.)

The Salsa20 and ChaCha stream ciphers have been added, in full and
reduced-round variants.

The scrypt hash function's performance has been improved on x86-64 SBCL.

Type checking for the PBKDF key derivation functions has been improved.

* Version 0.32.1, released 2012-12-29

** bug fixes

Fixed octet-streams for Allegro versions >= 9.0.  (Thanks to Elliott
Johnson.)

Fixed WRITE-SEQUENCE on octet-output-streams.  (Thanks to Martin
Nzioki.)

Tweak system definition to work better with newer versions of ASDF.
(Thanks to François-René Rideau.)

Fixed problems with the Fortuna prng.  (Thanks to Robert Uhl.)

* Version 0.32, released 2012-11-13

** bug fixes

Fixed a SB!WIN32 typo.  (Thanks to Leonard Huang.)

Fix cipher key verification for implementations that don't provide a
specialized (UNSIGNED-BYTE 8) array.  (Thanks to ralcantaraperez on github.)

Fix CAST5 compilation on some versions of Lispworks.

Fix an invalid LOOP form in the bignum math code.  (Thanks to Juan Jose
Garcia Ripoll.)

Fix a problem that some (all?) versions of x86-64 CCL have with the
64-bit SHA variants.

** improvements

The x86oid assembly SHA expand functions have been made significantly
smaller and faster.

** new features

An implementation of the scrypt key derivation function has been added.
Please see the documentation for details.  (Thanks to Chris Howey.)

* Version 0.31, released 2012-07-01

** bug fixes

Fixed a problem with digest buffering introduced in Ironclad 0.29.
(Thanks to Zach Beane for the bug report.)

MD5 on some versions of Lispworks works correctly again; unfortunately
this change required disabling the improved MD5 implementation added in
Ironclad 0.30.  (Thanks to Chhi'mèd Künzang for the bug report.)

Some compiler warnings on Lispworks have been fixed.  (Thanks to
Chhi'mèd Künzang for the bug report.)

The digest functions now really check their types instead of incorrectly
relying on DECLARE to provide the necessary type checks.  (Thanks to
dbunner-de on Github for the bug report.)

** improvements

Encryption and decryption with block ciphers and small numbers of blocks
should be somewhat faster.

Several small improvements have been made to the digest code which may
make it slightly faster when hashing short blocks of data.

The modular inverse code has been made significantly faster, which
should improve performance of public-key algorithms.  (Thanks to Robert
Uhl.)

Several digest tests should no longer fail on Clozure CL.  There have
been reports of tests taking inordinate amounts of time on various CCL
versions on various platforms, however.  (CCL 1.8, for instance, works
fine on Linux/x86-64, but explodes on Windows.)

** new features

An implementation of the Fortuna pseudo-random number generator has been
added.  Please see the documentation for details.  (Thanks to Robert Uhl
for the implementation.)

* Version 0.30, released 2012-03-27

** bug fixes

Fixed a bug in COPY-DIGEST for SHA224 and SHA384.  (Thanks to Robert Uhl
for noticing.)

** improvements

Added a Lispworks-specific MD5 implementation.  (Thanks to Pierre R. Mai
for the implementation and Klaus Harbo for integrating it into
Ironclad.)

Fixed bugs with *PRINT-CASE* and Allegro CL's modern mode.  (Thanks to
Robert Uhl and Hans Huebner.)

Ironclad now uses nibbles for its internal word-reffing and -setting
functions.  This change should speed up most operations by a small
amount on x86oid SBCL platforms.

SHA-512/384 should be somewhat faster on x86-64 SBCL.

The copy of rt.lisp included for testing has been updated to match the
version commonly in use.  (Thanks to Anton Vodonosov for pointing this
out.)

* Version 0.29, released 2011-11-17

** bug fixes

Fixed ENCRYPTED-MESSAGE-LENGTH (not a supported interface) for ECB and
CBC modes.  (Thanks to Ron Garrett.)

The compiler macros for the high-level digest functions now cope with
the user's setting of *PRINT-CASE*.  (Thanks to Robert Uhl.)

** improvements

Assembler versions of several core functions have been added for x86 and
x86-64 SBCL.  The functions include:

- octet copy loops;
- SHA1's core functions;
- SHA256's core expand function.

You need a recent SBCL to compile Ironclad now.

** new features

Added PBKDF convenience functions.  (Thanks to Vladimir Sedach.)
 
* Version 0.28, released 2010-03-26

** bug fixes

Fixed errors on 32-bit big-endian CMUCL and SBCL.  (Thanks to Raymond
Toy.)

Fixed an error with INTEGER-TO-OCTETS :BIG-ENDIAN NIL.  (Thanks to
Daniel Janus.)

** improvements

The code has been tweaked to generate less code for platforms that do
not support inlined 32-bit arithmetic.

** new features

Trees hashes are now supported, including the most common variant, Tiger
tree hashes.  Please see the documentation for details.  (Thanks to Fare
Rideau.)

* Version 0.27, released 2009-03-28

** bug fixes

Fixed several issues that came up with Allegro CL 8.1.  (Thanks to
Utz-Uwe Haus.)

Fixed compilation issues when the user had a non-standard *PRINT-CASE*.
(Thanks to Gustavo.)

Fixed an issue with LispWorks's recent update for conformance with
DEFSTRUCT's specification.  (Thanks to John Fremlin.)

** improvements

HMAC-DIGEST now supports placing the produced digest into a
user-provided buffer.  Please see the documentation for details.

HMAC now supports digests with larger block sizes than 64 bytes (such as
SHA2-512).

HMAC should be somewhat more efficient when producing digests.

REINITIALIZE-INSTANCE is now supported on HMAC objects.  Please see the
documentation for details.

CLEAR-OUTPUT is now supported on digesting streams.

** new features

The SHA-224, SHA2-384 and SHA2-512 digest functions have been added,
with tests.

Key derivation functions from PKCS #5 have been added.

On Gray streams-supporting implementations, WRITE-SEQUENCE is supported
on several stream classes, with more to come.

* Version 0.26, released 2008-05-17

** bug fixes

RC6 now compiles without error on non-x86 SBCL.  (Thanks to Kevin Reid.)

** incompatible changes

PRODUCE-DIGEST now *modifies* the state of the digest object passed to
it.  If you want to preserve that state for later, you will have to
explicitly call COPY-DIGEST.

** improvements

Compiler macros were added to improve the performance of
DIGEST-{SEQUENCE,STREAM,FILE}.  (Thanks to Attila Lendvai for motivating
this.)

Digest performance should be improved due to using structures; this
change should bring digest performance back in line with where it was
circa version 0.22.

* Version 0.25, released 2008-02-24

** bug fixes

CRC32 now works properly and agrees with other CRC32 implementations.
(Thanks to Todd Sabin.)

The testsuite is once again included.  (Thanks to Peter Graves for
pointing out the missing files.)

** improvements

BYTE-ARRAY-TO-HEX-STRING and ASCII-STRING-TO-BYTE-ARRAY have been
optimized and should perform better.  (Thanks to Attila Lendvai for the
optimizations.)

A compiler macro was added to improve the performance of MAKE-DIGEST.
MAKE-DIGEST should also be faster in cases where the compiler macro does
not apply.  (Thanks to Attila Lendvai for motivating this.)

** new features

The null cipher has been added to ease implementation of some security
protocols.  It is a block cipher with a BLOCK-LENGTH of 8 bytes.

* Version 0.24, released 2008-02-09

** bug fixes

A bogus DECLAIM in Whirlpool's implementation has been fixed.

** improvements

The way Whirlpool's registers are represented was changed slightly; the
new representation should be slightly more efficient and silences an
error in OpenMCL and LispWorks.  Due to the changes, it is recommended
that you compile this version of Ironclad in a fresh Lisp instance.
(Thanks to Chun Tian.)

Lispworks support for octet streams has been added.  OpenMCL support for
octet streams has been tweaked and should actually work now.  (Thanks to
Chun Tian.)

* Version 0.23, released 31-12-2007

** bug fixes

VERIFY-SIGNATURE for DSA signatures now respects the START and END
keyword arguments.  (Thanks to Ildar.)

** improvements

More refactoring of the internals has been performed; Ironclad should be
slightly smaller as a result.

Digest finalization on most digest types should cons significantly less.

** new features

REINITIALIZE-INSTANCE is now supported on digest objects.

CLEAR-OUTPUT is now supported on octet output streams.

A compiler macro was added to improve the performance of MAKE-CIPHER.

The Whirlpool digest function has been added, with tests.  (Thanks to
Peter Gijsels.)

DIGEST-FILE, DIGEST-STREAM, and UPDATE-DIGEST with a stream to update
from now accept three new keyword arguments: :BUFFER to specify a
temporary buffer into which the data from the file/stream should be
read, and :START and :END to specify the extent of the buffer that
should be used.

DIGEST-FILE, DIGEST-STREAM, and DIGEST-SEQUENCE now also accept a digest
object as their first argument in addition to a digest specifier.

* Version 0.22, released 12-06-2007

** bug fixes

Fixed issues with octet streams and Allegro CL.  (Thanks to
"quasilists".)

Fixed a bug in some type declarations that was causing XCL to (rightly)
complain when compiling Ironclad.  (Thanks to Peter Graves.)

The rsa.lisp file previously advertised to be in the distribution is now
actually present.  (Thanks to oudeis.)

** new features

Byte-wise CFB mode (:CFB8) encryption and decryption have been added.
(Thanks to Robert J. Macomber for suggesting this might be necessary for
interoperating with other crypto toolkits.)

UPDATE-DIGEST has new methods that can update the digest from a stream.
See the documentation for details.

* Version 0.21, released 21-04-2007

** bug fixes

Rewrote internal key-checking logic to provide a better error message
when a :KEY argument is not provided to MAKE-CIPHER.  (Thanks to Mark
Carter.)

Fixed LIST calls that exceeded CALL-ARGUMENTS-LIMIT.  (Thanks to piso on
#lisp.)

Fixed tests to use RTEST nickname rather than RT to avoid name conflicts
for LispWorks users.  (Thanks to Sven Van Caekenberghe.)

Fixed the Twofish, Blowfish, CAST5, and RC6 ciphers to work properly in
LispWorks.  (Thanks to Sven Van Caekenberghe.)

Fixed a problem with DEFINE-DIGEST-REGISTERS.  (Thanks to Sven Van
Caekenberghe.)

Fixed a problem with CMUCL and octet-streams.  (Thanks to Raymond Toy.)

* Version 0.20.1, released 21-02-2007

** bug fixes

Fixed system definition to push onto *FEATURES* correctly in CMUCL.
(Thanks to Raymond Toy.)

Fixed several mismatches in the documentation between the arglists and
the prose that described them.  (Thanks to Zach Beane.)

Fixed IRONCLAD-TESTS to include the 3des test vectors.  (Thanks to
Raymond Toy and fe[nl]ix on #lisp who reported this.)

* Version 0.20, released 20-02-2007

** bug fixes

The "counting" part of CTR mode in SBCL has been fixed.

A bug in SHA-1 and SHA-256's usage of LOOP has been fixed.

** incompatible changes

The interface to MAKE-CIPHER has been redone.  Please see the
documentation for details.

** improvements

Square, TEA, and XTEA now come with test vectors.

CRC24, CRC32, and Adler32 now come with test vectors.

The test suite has been significantly reworked.  It is now somewhat
faster to execute and the compilation time for the system IRONCLAD-TESTS
has been significantly reduced.

Documentation for the library has been written; see doc/ironclad.html.
Corrections and suggestions for improvements are much appreciated.

The internals of cipher definition and ENCRYPT/DECRYPT have been
rewritten.  The net result is that the footprint of Ironclad has been
reduced by ~25% (x86 SBCL) due to fewer methods being defined for each
cipher.  Furthermore, adding new ciphers will add only a few methods,
rather than the large number that were created before.

** new features

PRODUCE-DIGEST and DIGEST-{STREAM,SEQUENCE,FILE} can optionally place
the computed digest into a preallocated user-supplied buffer.  Please
see the documentation for these functions for details.  (Thanks to Zach
Beane for suggesting this feature.)

RSA encryption routines have been added.  These are very "raw"
routines, undoubtedly in need of some polish.

Support for CMACs (NIST 800-38B and RFC 4439) has been added.  (Thanks
to Koga Kazuo for an initial implementation.)

* Version 0.13, released 03-05-2006

** improvements

Added a (require :gray-streams) for CMUCL.  (Thanks to Raymond Toy for
suggesting this.)

SHA-1 should now work on older versions of CLISP.  (>= 2.34 or so)

Tiger is now supported on all Common Lisps, not just SBCL.

** new features

The ARCFOUR stream cipher has been added, with tests.  A new mode for
ARCFOUR and similar stream ciphers, imaginatively named :STREAM, is used
when creating an ARCFOUR cipher context with MAKE-CIPHER.  (Thanks to
Tim Daly Jr.)

{EN,DE}CRYPT-IN-PLACE have been added to make the programmer's intent
clearer and to provide shorter calls for common operations.

Digesting streams, which compute a specified digest of data being
written, are now available on all Lisps that support octet streams.
The digest of the data written so far may be retrieved with
PRODUCE-DIGEST.

* Version 0.12, released 30-01-2006

** bugfixes

Fixed XTEA decryption.

Fixed incorrect type declarations in the Adler32 digest.  (Thanks to
Thas on #lisp.  Thanks to Xach for permission to borrow his code from
Salza.)

Fixed MAKE-OCTET-INPUT-STREAM to instantiate the right class.
(Thanks to Eric Marsden.)

** new features

The RC2 block cipher has been added, with tests.

Octet streams are now supported on Allegro CL and CMUCL.

A family of functions, UB{16,32,64}REF/{BE,LE}, has been added for
referencing (UNSIGNED-BYTE {16,32,64}) values of the appropriate
endianness from octet vectors.  These functions are SETF-able.

** improvements

Exported EXPT-MOD from the IRONCLAD package.

* Version 0.11, released 10-11-2005

** bugfixes

Fixed tests HMAC.0 and HMAC.1 (which would have worked had they referred
to the proper ASCII-STRING-TO-BYTE-ARRAY...).  (Thanks to Raymond Toy.)

Fixed CBC mode decryption to match CBC mode encryption.  *blush*
(Thanks to Travis Cross.)  Sanity checks have been added to the test
suite to make this sort of thing less likely to happen in the future.

Fixed the initializer for CRC24; CRC24 now works properly.

Fixed a hashing bug common to MD{2,4,5}, SHA-1, SHA-256, RIPEMD-128,
RIPEMD-160, and Tiger when updating the digest state with an amount of
data smaller than the space remaining in the internal buffer.  Tests
have been added to ensure this doesn't happen again.

Fixed DIGEST-SEQUENCE on SBCL and CMUCL to respect the fill-pointer of
a vector.  (Thanks to Steve Smith.)

** new features

A new generic function to inspect supported key lengths for ciphers has
been added.  By no small coincidence, it is named KEY-LENGTHS.  Please
see its documentation string for details.  (Thanks to Travis Cross.)

Counter mode (:CTR) encryption and decryption has been added.

Octet streams, which are like string-streams, only for octet vectors,
have been added.  As of this release, they only work in SBCL and
OpenMCL; if your favorite implementation is not supported, patches are
welcome.

Asymmetric encryption routines have been included in this release; only
DSA (signing and verification) routines are included.  Although test
vectors are not (yet) included, this release of Ironclad was signed
using routines from Ironclad.

IMPORTANT: Please note that DSA signing of messages is on the *digest*
of the message, not the message itself.  Please also note that the
DSA signing routine requires *random* numbers; it currently uses
CL:RANDOM for this purpose, which is probably *NOT* secure enough for
your needs.  Please make any changes you deem necessary to the signing
routine to accommodate your security level.

Feedback is sought on the interface to the routines:

- MAKE-PUBLIC-KEY
- MAKE-PRIVATE-KEY
- SIGN-MESSAGE
- VERIFY-MESSAGE

DEFGENERICs for ENCRYPT-MESSAGE and DECRYPT-MESSAGE have been included.
No methods on them are currently defined.  Methods for RSA keys and
ElGamal keys will likely be forthcoming in a future release.  Feedback
is also requested for those functions as well.

* Version 0.10, released 01-11-2005

** bugfixes

Exported several block cipher context class names that were previously
unexported.

Digesting files and streams now works properly on MCL and other Lisps
that "mangle" stream-element-type.  (Thanks to Hoan Ton-That.)

** new features

Functions ASCII-STRING-TO-BYTE-ARRAY and BYTE-ARRAY-TO-HEX-STRING
were moved from the IRONCLAD-TESTS package into Ironclad itself.  These
functions seem useful enough to have around at all times.  Please see
the docstrings for these functions for usage documentation.  (Thanks to
kire on #lisp for suggesting this.)

** improvements

The memory footprint of Ironclad should be slightly reduced.

MAKE-CIPHER throws real errors for unsupported ciphers
(IRONCLAD:UNSUPPORTED-CIPHER) or modes (IRONCLAD:UNSUPPORTED-MODE),
rather than NO-APPLICABLE-METHOD.

* Version 0.9.1, released 13-09-2005

** bugfixes

Fixed problems related to non-ANSI use of SUBSEQ on circular lists.

* Version 0.9, released 13-09-2005

** bugfixes

The TripleDES block cipher now passes all included test vectors.

** new features

The RC6 block cipher has been added, with tests.

The MISTY1 block cipher has been added, with tests.  MISTY1 is unique
among the current crop of ciphers supported by Ironclad, as an
implementation that uses 16-bit arithmetic rather than 32-bit is
straightforward.  Therefore, MISTY1's performance should be better than,
say, DES or Blowfish on Common Lisp implementations that do not support
unboxed 32-bit arithmetic.

** performance improvements

The performance of the SHA-1 and SHA-256 hash functions should be
significantly improved.

* Version 0.8, released 29-08-2005

** bugfixes

Added missing :LOAD-TOPLEVEL to EVAL-WHEN in blowfish.lisp; tests now
pass on ACL 7.0, Linux/x86.  (Thanks to chavatar on #lisp.)

Fixed a case when digesting a file would throw a TYPE-ERROR.  (Thanks to
Hoan Ton-That.)

Test vectors have been added for TripleDES, which immediately caught
several bugs in the current implementation.  However, many of the
TripleDES tests do not pass in the current release.  Using TripleDES
until all tests pass is not recommended.

Test vectors have been added for SHA-1, which immediately caught a bug
in the production of digests.  This bug has been fixed.

** new features

The RC5 cipher has been added, with tests.

The SHA-256 hash function has been added, with tests.

* Version 0.7.2, released 24-08-2005

** bugfixes

Fixed calls to ROL32 to only use positive arguments.  This change should
result in more tests (particularly the Twofish tests) passing on
non-SBCL implementations.  (Thanks to Raymond Toy for tracking this one
down.)

Fixed some ACL 6.2 (trial) warnings related to multiply-defined
functions, non-EVAL-WHEN'd DEFCONSTANT forms, unused variables, and an
incomplete ASDF system definition.  These fixes should also eliminate
warnings in other implementations as well.  (Thanks to chavatar on #lisp
for motivating this.)

* Version 0.7.1, released 23-08-2005

** bugfixes

UPDATE-HMAC now returns the HMAC object upon which it operated, rather
than internal hashing state.  (Thanks to rich_holygoat on #lisp.)

Condition names are now exported from the IRONCLAD package.

FINALIZE-ADLER32-STATE was fixed to properly store and return the
computed digest.  (Thanks to Raymond Toy.)

The test suite now excludes Tiger on non-SBCL Common Lisps (since Tiger
is currently only supported on SBCL).  (Thanks to Raymond Toy.)

* Version 0.7, released 11-08-2005

** incompatible changes

Support for SBCL versions older than 0.9.0 has been removed.

** bugfixes

The RIPEMD family of hash functions now passes all included test vectors.

The MD4 hash function now passes all included test vectors.

The CAST5 block cipher now passes all included test vectors.

When appropriate, ARRAY-DIMENSION-LIMIT is now used to specify types
instead of ARRAY-TOTAL-SIZE-LIMIT.

A bug related to an argument-passing mismatch between the low-level
hashing routines and their high-level counterparts has been fixed.

** new features

TripleDES has been added.

Real conditions (subclasses of IRONCLAD:IRONCLAD-ERROR) are now signaled
in several exceptional situations.

*** introspection changes

New generic functions DIGEST-LENGTH and BLOCK-LENGTH have been added.
Please see the documentation strings for these generic functions for
details.

* Version 0.6, released 21-02-2005

** bugfixes

Due to the addition of a real, functioning test suite, many bugs have
been fixed, including an embarassing one involving decryption.  While
not all of the provided digest functions and ciphers pass the test suite
yet, the number of fixes brought about by adding the test suite called
for a new release.

The AES, Twofish, IDEA, DES, and Blowfish implementations pass the test
suite along with the MD5, SHA-1 and Tiger hash function implementations.

** new features

The checksums Adler32, CRC24, and CRC32 have been added.

The IDEA and Twofish ciphers have been added.

New digest interfaces have been added.  Please check the documentation
strings for MAKE-DIGEST, COPY-DIGEST, UPDATE-DIGEST, and PRODUCE-DIGEST
for details.

Support for HMACs has been added.

** optimizations

FETCH-UB32 and STORE-UB32 are now coded inline, which should eliminate
bignum consing in some implementations.

Better type declarations have been added to make the extraction of
word-sized data from (UNSIGNED-BYTE 32) vectors less expensive.

The Blowfish implementation has been optimized and should cons less.

The AES implementation has been optimized and should be at least 2x faster.

* Version 0.5, released 05-01-2005

** bugfixes

The Square cipher was severly broken in previous releases.  This
oversight has been remedied.  Other ciphers were broken in similar
ways (e.g. argument ordering problems) and the function definitions
for the cipher operation modes were broken as well.  These problems have
been fixed.

** incompatible changes

Strings are no longer "digestable"--you must convert the string to a
byte vector before digesting it.

Hex strings are no longer permitted as keys for ciphers.

** introspection changes

Added functions {DIGEST,CIPHER,MODE}-SUPPORTED-P and
LIST-ALL-{DIGEST,CIPHER,MODE}S so applications can determine on the fly
what algorithms are supported by the package.

** test framework added

Test vectors from official specifications have been added to the package
and ASDF definitions for a test framework have been added as well.  Note
that the testing suite is not yet fully operational. :)

* Version 0.4, released 27-11-2004

Cipher keys can now be specified as hexadecimal strings or as byte
vectors.

Various little cleanups were made.

* Version 0.3, released 26-11-2004

initial release
